Rotterdam gardens: Kralingen & Trompenburg
##########################################

:tags: de hortus op
:slug: rotterdamse-tuinen
:og_image: ../images/hortus/kralingen/fontein.jpg
:lang: en
:date: 2024-06-29
:status: published
:summary: I'm going the hortus up: I want to visit more botanical gardens *and*
    write more, so I'm combining them so one becomes a reason to do the other.
    In May, I visited two gardens in Rotterdam: Kralingen and Trompenburg, which
    formed a neat contrast between them.

I'm going the hortus up: I want to visit more botanical gardens *and* write
more, so I'm combining them so one becomes a reason to do the other. In May, I
visited two gardens in Rotterdam: Kralingen and Trompenburg, which formed a neat
contrast between them.

Kralingen Botanical Garden
==========================

.. table::
   :widths: auto

   ============ =
   Date         24 May 2024
   Adress       `Cederstraat 5, Rotterdam <https://www.openstreetmap.org/node/2804875327>`_
   Website      https://www.botanischetuinkralingen.nl/
   ============ =

.. figure:: /images/hortus/kralingen/ingang.jpg
    :alt: Seen from the garden, a green fence with an open gate. Beyond the fence, cars drive by. On this side you see pots, low hedges, and a tidy gravel path.
    :align: right
    :width: 300

    The entrance on the busy Kralingse Plaslaan

From the train station it's twenty minutes by tram and foot to get to the
Kralingen Botanical Garden. Almost hidden in the old neighbourhood—it's easy to
miss on Kralingse Plaslaan, and the Cederstraat main entrance lies between a
high school and apartment buildings—but once inside you start wondering where
all this space came from. A fun history, it turns out: in 1910, the apparently
well-known local Willem Simon Burger gifted the land to the city, one one
condition: that it would be used to benefit the public. It soon became a
botanical garden, which was opened to the public in 1984, according to the
`garden's website <https://www.botanischetuinkralingen.nl/kopie-van-de-tuin>`_.

Kralingse Plaslaan is a fairly busy road, full of the sounds of the city.
Entering the garden from that side, a sense of relief grows as with every step
the city noise diminishes, until you're surrounded by greenery and you can't
tell where the garden begins or ends. The city remains close: beyond the
treetops you can see apartment buildings and the nearby high school, Libanon
Lyceum.

That school is very present in the garden: in their free time, students seek out
the patio in the center of the garden, and some more enclosed areas between the
plants are also popular. Thanks to its location and free entry, it really does
feel like a garden for the people who live here. It seems to me that Mr. Burger
would approve wholeheartedly.


.. figure:: /images/hortus/kralingen/fontein.jpg
    :alt: A stone fountain and three benches, surrounded by all sorts of greenery that seems to want to take over completely.

    The fountain near the center of the garden. Not pictured: mosquitos.

.. figure:: /images/hortus/kralingen/hommel.jpg
    :alt: A yellow-black-yellow-black-white bumblebee on a large spherical purple flower, composed of maybe a hundred smaller flowers.
    :align: left
    :width: 300

    A bumblebee on an onion.

After the university gardens in Amsterdam and Utrecht, Kralingen contrasted
sharply: no meticulous design with beautiful arches and eye-catching scenes, but
a very functional and above all full garden where you can nevertheless find
peace. Maintenance is a little less complete. There are leaves all over, and the
little fountain that looks like it's practically in the open `on the map
<https://www.botanischetuinkralingen.nl/general-8>`_ is easy to miss, and the
standing water seems to attract a lot of flying insects. The rose-covered
pergola mainly looks promising, but maybe it's the wrong season for them. I
don't want to sound negative, here: I enjoy a crowded, slightly messy garden. I
recognize the art in a carefully laid out and maintained garden, but I prefer a
little chaos, and enjoy a surprise around every corner. If that means a `big old
Gunnera </images/hortus/kralingen/gunnera.jpg>`_ blocks the path, I'll gladly
take it.

A multitude of insects, birds, and toads makes an interesting garden apart from
the botanical. There's a good reason there's a tour called "The garden as an
ecological system" in August: it is all part of the same whole.

All in all, Kralingen may have been the perfect start for my
tour-de-botanical-gardens: completely different from what I'd `seen before
<{filename}de-hortus-op-nl.rst>`_, and a very different take on what a botanical
garden can be. When I asked an employee to get a poster for `BioBlitz Rotterdam
<https://www.hetnatuurhistorisch.nl/bezoek/activiteiten/activiteit/bioblitz-21-en-22-mei-2023/>`_
that she was about to throw out, I got handed a stack of new posters and a
calendar. More than ever, I wish we had a place like this in Eindhoven.